[WIP] Making ML-powered web games with Transformers.js (#1287)
huggingface/blog: ml-web-games.md

---
title: "Making ML-powered web games with Transformers.js" 
thumbnail: /blog/assets/ml-web-games/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: Xenova

> ---

Author: Oh right! Thanks 🤗

# Making ML-powered web games with Transformers.js

<!-- {blog_metadata} -->
<!-- {authors} -->

> In this blog post, I'll show you how I made **Doodle Dash**: a real-time ML-powered web game which runs completely in your browser, thanks to [Transformers.js](https://github.com/xenova/transformers.js). The goal of this tutorial is to show you how easy it is to make your own ML-powered web game... just in time for the upcoming Open Source AI Game Jam (7-9 July, 2023). [Join](https://itch.io/jam/open-source-ai-game-jam) the game jam if you haven't already!

Reviewer: Thanks 🤗

<video src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/ml-web-games/demo.mp4" alt="Demo video"></video>

### Quick links

- **Demo:** [Doodle Dash](https://huggingface.co/spaces/Xenova/doodle-dash)

> - **Source code:** [doodle-dash](https://github.com/xenova/doodle-dash)

Reviewer 2: Repo appears to be private.

Author: Public now 👍

> - **Join the game jam:** [Open Source AI Game Jam](https://itch.io/jam/open-source-ai-game-jam)

Author: Done! 👍  https://github.com/huggingface/blog/commit/910482fdb315802ebd6970b0d8df95bb2c7ffcfa

## Overview

Before we start, let's talk about what we'll be creating. The game is inspired by Google's [Quick, Draw!](https://quickdraw.withgoogle.com/) game, where you're given a word and a neural network has 20 seconds to guess what you're drawing (repeated 6 times). In fact, we'll be using their [training data](#training-data) to train our own sketch detection model! Don't you just love open source? 😍

In our version, you'll have one minute to draw as many items as you can. If the model predicts the correct label, the canvas will be cleared and you'll be given a new word. Keep doing this until the timer runs out! Also, since the game will be running completely locally, we don't have to worry about latency to and from a server. This means that the model will be able to make real-time predictions (over 60 predictions a seconds)... 🤯 WOW!

The rest of this tutorial is split into 3 sections:
1. Training the neural network
2. Running in the browser with Transformers.js

> 3. Game Design

Author: Done 👍  https://github.com/huggingface/blog/commit/e63d5d4ba04b3f7c7c0347e5fb1780c8ee1dbb62

## 1. Training the neural network

> *NOTE:* If you want to skip this section, you can download the pretrained model from the [here](https://huggingface.co/Xenova/quickdraw-mobilevit-small).

Author: I ended up moving it to the finetuning section: https://github.com/huggingface/blog/commit/d99e8b4481721b155d4af720ff4d9b87441e7f5e

### Training data

> We'll be training our model using a [subset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/Xenova/quickdraw) of Google's [Quick, Draw!](https://quickdraw.withgoogle.com/data) dataset, which contains over 5 million drawings across 345 categories. Here are some samples from the dataset:

Author: Actually, the dataset is only of 5 million images (I made a 10% subset of it), since 50M images would be completely overkill for a 5.6M parameter model. So, I just randomly selected and split the dataset into a 4.5M train, 0.25M valid, and 0.25M test split.

> We'll be training our model using a [subset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/Xenova/quickdraw) of Google's [Quick, Draw!](https://quickdraw.withgoogle.com/data) dataset, which contains over 5 million drawings across 345 categories. Here are some samples from the dataset:

Reviewer 2: Oh, maybe you wanted to link to https://huggingface.co/datasets/Xenova/quickdraw-small, not https://huggingface.co/datasets/Xenova/quickdraw? (the latter appears to contain 50 M rows)

> We'll be training our model using a [subset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/Xenova/quickdraw) of Google's [Quick, Draw!](https://quickdraw.withgoogle.com/data) dataset, which contains over 5 million drawings across 345 categories. Here are some samples from the dataset:

Author: 🤦‍♂️ yep!!! thanks for spotting that.

![Quick, Draw! dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/ml-web-games/quickdraw-dataset.png)

### Model architecture

> We'll be finetuning [`apple/mobilevit-small`](https://huggingface.co/apple/mobilevit-small), a light-weight and mobile-friendly Vision Transformer. It has only 5.6M parameters, meaning it will be perfect for running in-browser (~20MB)! For more information, check out the [MobileViT](https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.02178) paper.

Reviewer 3: Maybe link to paper page here

Reviewer 2: https://huggingface.co/papers/2110.02178

(You can also install Julien's chrome extension for arxiv :))

Author: Thanks!

![MobileViT archtecture](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/ml-web-games/mobilevit.png)

### Finetuning

> <a target="_blank" href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/xenova/doodle-dash/blob/main/training.ipynb">

Reviewer 2: (Still private)

Author: Fixed 👍

    <img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" alt="Open In Colab"/>
</a>

> To keep the blog post (relatively) short, we've prepared a Colab notebook which will show you the exact steps we took to finetune the model. At a high level, this involves:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To keep the blog post (relatively) short, we've prepared a Colab notebook which will show you the exact steps we took to finetune the pretrained `apple/mobilevit-small` model with the "Quick, Draw!" dataset. At a high level, this involves:
```

1. Loading the [dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/Xenova/quickdraw-small).

> 2. Transforming the dataset using a custom [`MobileViTImageProcessor`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/mobilevit#transformers.MobileViTImageProcessor).

Author: I just modified the defaults: e.g., image/crop size 28 vs 256 and do not convert to rgb.

> 3. Defining our [collate function](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main_classes/data_collator) and [evaluation metric](https://huggingface.co/docs/evaluate/types_of_evaluations#metrics).

Reviewer 2: Maybe explain what these are, in a sentence, in the context of this project.

Author: I do explain them in the colab notebook:
![image](https://github.com/huggingface/blog/assets/26504141/159680ba-8ba3-4611-a5b6-06fe8a63c3a0)

> 4. Loading a [pretrained model](https://huggingface.co/apple/mobilevit-small) using [`MobileViTForImageClassification.from_pretrained`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/mobilevit#transformers.MobileViTForImageClassification).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Loading the [MobileVIT pretrained model](https://huggingface.co/apple/mobilevit-small) using [`MobileViTForImageClassification.from_pretrained`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/mobilevit#transformers.MobileViTForImageClassification).
```

5. Training the model using the [`Trainer`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main_classes/trainer) and [`TrainingArguments`](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main_classes/trainer#transformers.TrainingArguments) helper classes.

6. Evaluating the model using [🤗 Evaluate](https://huggingface.co/docs/evaluate).

## 2. Running in the browser with Transformers.js

### What is Transformers.js?

[Transformers.js](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers.js) is a JavaScript library which allows you to run [🤗 Transformers](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers) directly in your browser (no need for a server)! It's designed to be functionally equivalent to the python library, meaning you can run the same pretrained models using a very similar API. 

> Behind the scenes, Transformers.js uses [ONNX Runtime](https://onnxruntime.ai/), so, we'll first need to convert our pretrained PyTorch, TensorFlow, or JAX model to ONNX.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Behind the scenes, Transformers.js uses [ONNX Runtime](https://onnxruntime.ai/), so we need to convert our finetuned PyTorch model to ONNX.
```

### Converting our model to ONNX

> Fortunately, the [🤗 Optimum](https://huggingface.co/docs/optimum) library makes it super simple to convert your pretrained model to ONNX! The easiest (and recommended way) is to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fortunately, the [🤗 Optimum](https://huggingface.co/docs/optimum) library makes it super simple to convert your finetuned model to ONNX! The easiest (and recommended way) is to:
```

1. Clone the [Transformers.js repository](https://github.com/xenova/transformers.js) and install the necessary dependencies:

    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/xenova/transformers.js.git
    cd transformers.js
    pip install -r scripts/requirements.txt
    ```

> 2. Run the conversion script:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Run the conversion script (it calls `Optimum` under the hood):
```

    ```bash
    python -m scripts.convert --quantize --model_id <model_id>

>     ```

Reviewer 2: Maybe explain the quantization type. No need to explain what quantization is (imo), but provide some information on it. Is the filesize still 20 MB?

Author: Actually, I could maybe remove the quantization parameter since in the final game, I use the unquantized version. Quantization would bring it down to 5.6MB, but when I tested a while ago, it yielded poor performance. I'll do some more testing 🤓

Reviewer 2: In that case I'd say let's remove the option, yes :)

Author: Done 👍  https://github.com/huggingface/blog/commit/9c807ebc1800da654fc897f01ff44d5c4a1f389a

    where `<model_id>` is the name of the model you want to convert (e.g. `Xenova/quickdraw-mobilevit-small`).

### Setting up our project

Let's start by scaffolding a simple React app using Vite:

```bash
npm create vite@latest doodle-dash -- --template react
```

Next, enter the project directory and install the necessary dependencies:

```bash
cd doodle-dash
npm install
npm install @xenova/transformers
```

You can then start the development server by running:

```bash
npm run dev
```

### Running the model in the browser

> Since running machine learning models can be quite computationally intensive, it's important that we perform inference in a separate thread (so that we don't block the main thread, which is used for rendering the UI). Fortunately, the [Web Workers API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Workers_API) makes this super simple!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Running machine learning models is computationally intensive, so it's important to perform inference in a separate thread. This way we won't block the main thread, which is used for rendering the UI and reacting to your drawing gestures :) The [Web Workers API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Workers_API) makes this super simple!
```

        worker.current.addEventListener('message', onMessageReceived);

        // Define a cleanup function for when the component is unmounted.
        return () => worker.current.removeEventListener('message', onMessageReceived);
    });

    // ... rest of the component
}
```

You can test that everything is working by running the development server (with `npm run dev`), visiting the local website (usually [http://localhost:5173/](http://localhost:5173/)), and opening the browser console. You should see the output of the model being logged to the console.
```js
[{ label: "skateboard", score: 0.9980043172836304 }]
```

*Woohoo!* 🥳 Althought the above code is just a small part of the [final product](https://github.com/xenova/doodle-dash), it shows how simple the machine learning side of it is! The rest is just making it look nice and adding some game logic.

## 3. Game Design

In this section, I'll briefly discuss the game design process. As a reminder, you can find the full source code for the project on [GitHub](https://github.com/xenova/doodle-dash), so I won't be going into detail about the code itself.

### Taking advantage of real-time performance

> One of the main advantages of performing in-browser inference is that we can make predictions in real-time (over 60 times a second). In the original [Quick, Draw!](https://quickdraw.withgoogle.com/) game, the model only makes a new prediction every couple of seconds. Although we could do the same thing in our game, it would make the in-browser inference seem a lot less impressive! So, I decided to redesign the main game loop:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the main advantages of performing in-browser inference is that we can make predictions in real-time (over 60 times a second). In the original [Quick, Draw!](https://quickdraw.withgoogle.com/) game, the model only makes a new prediction every couple of seconds. We could do the same in our game, but it would be much less impressive! So, I decided to redesign the main game loop:
```

- Instead of six 20-second rounds (where each round corresponds to a new word), our version tasks the player with correctly drawing as many doodles as they can in 60 seconds.
- If you come across a word you are unable to draw, you can skip it (but this will cost you 3 seconds of your remaining time).

> - In the original game, since the model would make a guess every few seconds, it could slowly cross labels off the list until it eventually guessed correctly. In our version, however, we can't do the same thing since we would fly through the list in a couple of seconds. To solve this problem, we slowly decrease the the model's scores for the first `n` incorrect predictions, with `n` increasing over time as the user continues drawing. After adjusting the scores, we renornamlize them to obtain a probability distribution over the labels (i.e., they sum to 1).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- In the original game, since the model would make a guess every few seconds, it could slowly cross labels off the list until it eventually guessed correctly. In our version, however, we can't do the same thing since we would fly through the list in a couple of seconds. To solve this problem, we slowly decrease the model's scores for the first `n` incorrect predictions, with `n` increasing over time as the user continues drawing. After adjusting the scores, we renormalize them to obtain a probability distribution over the labels (i.e., they sum to 1).
```

This is confusing to me as you need to know how the original game worked and how it differs from our implementation. I'd maybe try to simplify and remove most of the implementation details.

Author: Sure thing, I'll try simplify this section 😅

Author: Simplified: https://github.com/huggingface/blog/commit/3442d524bb2df25b83ef21c821f199e8a299569c

### Quality of life improvements

The original dataset contains 345 different classes, and since our model is relatively small (~20MB), it sometimes is unable to correctly guess some of the classes. To solve this problem, we removed some words which are either:
- Too similar to other labels (e.g., "barn" vs. "house")
- Too difficult to understand (e.g., "animal migration")
- Too difficult to draw in sufficient detail (e.g., "brain")

> - Ambigious (e.g., "bat")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Ambiguous (e.g., "bat")
```

Lol. We could have also disambiguated them ("bat (animal)"), but this is cool.

Author: 😅 ahhh I should have typed this thing in Google sheets or something (with spellcheck haha). I just did it in VSCode 😂😅

After filtering, we were still left with over 300 different classes!

### BONUS: Coming up with the name

> In the spirit of open-source development, I decided to ask [Hugging Chat](https://huggingface.co/chat/) (Hugging Face's open-source version of ChatGPT) for some game name ideas... and needless to say, it did not disappoint!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the spirit of open-source development, I decided to ask [Hugging Chat](https://huggingface.co/chat/) for some game name ideas... and needless to say, it did not disappoint!
```

> In the spirit of open-source development, I decided to ask [Hugging Chat](https://huggingface.co/chat/) (Hugging Face's open-source version of ChatGPT) for some game name ideas... and needless to say, it did not disappoint!

Reviewer: Good idea 👍

> ![MobileViT archtecture](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/ml-web-games/huggingchat.png)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Game name suggestions by Hugging Chat](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/ml-web-games/huggingchat.png)
```

I liked the alliteration of "Doodle Dash" (suggestion #4), so I decided to go with that. Thanks Hugging Chat! 🤗

---

> I hope you enjoyed building this game with me! If you have any questions or suggestions, you can find me on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/xenovacom) or [GitHub](https://github.com/xenova/doodle-dash). Also, if you want to improve the game (game modes? power-ups? animations? sound effects?), feel free to [fork](https://github.com/xenova/doodle-dash/fork) the project and submit a pull request! I'd love to see what you come up with!

Reviewer 3: Or the hub :D https://hf.co/xenova

Author: Done! 👍  https://github.com/huggingface/blog/commit/96848345095c9ff917dc382d18f0203ecf5535b5
